# Tab Protocol


**Tab** is the protocol used to talk with [Shift](../README.md), it allows client compositors to connect to Shift, draw to the screen to their own sessions, receive inputs and allows the administrator compositor to switch between sessions.

## Connecting and Sending/Reading Messages

The connection is made by connecting to the Unix Domain Socket at `/tmp/shift.sock`, and messages are passed in a JSON format.

All communication between the compositor (client) and Shift (server) happens through this socket using JSON-encoded messages.
Each message is a single UTF-8 JSON object, terminated by a newline (\n). Messages are bidirectional — both sides can send requests and events asynchronously.

However, simply reading and writing bytes to the socket is not enough — transferring DMA-BUFs and textures between processes requires using sendmsg and recvmsg with SCM_RIGHTS.

These file descriptors travel through a separate ancillary data channel, but are always associated with a specific JSON message by index references within the message payload.

For example, a JSON message may include `"fds": [0, 1],` indicating that two file descriptors were attached and sent via SCM_RIGHTS alongside the JSON payload.

## Message Structure
Each message consists of:
- A JSON payload (text string)
- Optional attached file descriptors sent in the same `sendmsg` call

Shift associates the JSON and the FDs by order of arrival.
Within the JSON, FDs are referred to by their index (starting at 0) in the file descriptors that are sent in the control message.

**Example:**
```jsonc
{
  "type": "request",
  "action": "frame_commit",
  "data": {
    "width": 1920,
    "height": 1080,
    "format": "ARGB8888",
    "stride": 7680,
    "fd": 0       // refers to the first FD attached in SCM_RIGHTS
  }
}
```
When this message is sent with one DMA-BUF file descriptor, Shift can read it and match index 0 to the first FD sent in the `sendmsg` call.

## Authentication

Tab has a strict authentication model following the least previlege principle, giving the compositors only the permissions they need to function.

After connecting, the client **MUST** send a *token* needed to know which session you will draw to and there are two kinds of tokens:
- **Administration token**: This token is the first token generated by Shift and has special privileges such as creating new sessions, switching between sessions and kicking out compositors connected to Shift. This token is generally owned by the login screen of the operating system.
- **Session token**: This token is created by whoever possesses the Administration token as a result of creating a new session. This token is used by compositors to draw to the screen and can't manage and touch other sessions besides itself.
<!-- TODO -->
